add release notes for SL (#5692)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-versions/release-notes.md

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer
- **New:** Added support for <Term id="predicate-pushdown"/> SQL optimization in MetricFlow. We will now push down categorical dimension filters to the metric source table. Previously filters were applied after we selected from the metric source table. This change helps reduce full table scans on certain query engines.
- **New:** Enabled `where` filters  on dimensions (included in saved queries) to use the cache during query time. This means you can now dynamically filter your dashboards without losing the performance benefits of caching. Refer to [caching](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/sl-cache#result-caching) for more information.

> - **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), we added information icons and descriptions to metrics and dimensions options in the Query Builder menu. Click on the **Info icon** button to view a description of the metric or dimension. Available in the following Query Builder menu sections: metric, group by, where, saved selections, and saved queries.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), we added information icons and descriptions to metrics and dimensions options in the Query Builder menu. Click on the **Info** icon button to view a description of the metric or dimension. Available in the following Query Builder menu sections: metric, group by, where, saved selections, and saved queries.
```

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer
- **New:** Introducing a new granularity option for cumulative metrics, `period_agg`. `period_agg` is nested under the `type_params` parameter and specifies how to roll up the cumulative metric to another granularity. Options are `start`, `end`, `average`. Defaults to `start` if no `window` is specified. 

> - **New:** Add validation that derived metrics always have expr

Author: might need more info here

> - **New:** Add validation that derived metrics always have expr

Author: ```suggestion
- **New:** Add validation that derived metrics must always have an `expr` key.
```

> - **New:** Enable cache to pickup where filters that are included in saved queries

Author: this has `type_params` which conflicts with `cumulative_type_params`

> - **Enhancement:** Cumulative metrics now supports `type_params` under a nested key: `cumulative_type_params`. MetricFlow supports the old `type_params` parameter but will throw a warning if found there.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Enhancement:** Cumulative metrics now support the `cumulative_type_params` key. The `cumulative_type_params` parameter replaces `type_params`. MetricFlow supports the old `type_params` key but will issue a warning if used.
```

> - **Enhancement:** Cumulative metrics now support the `cumulative_type_params` key. The `cumulative_type_params` parameter replaces `type_params`. MetricFlow supports the old `type_params` key but will issue a warning if used.

Author: is this version-specific? Also is this something we should be adding to the docs? currently the docs only have the `type_params`?

> - **Enhancement:** Update MetricFlow to use new `cumulative_type_params` fields for cumulative metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: this seems the same as the bullet above?

> - **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), we added information icons and descriptions to metrics and dimensions options in the Query Builder menu. You can hover over the information icon to see a description of the metric or dimension. Available in the following Query Builder menu sections: metric, group by, where, saved selections, and saved queries.

Reviewer: In this case you can't hover, you have to click on the info button.

> - **Enhancement:** You can now apply granularity to all time dimensions, not just metric time. This update uses our [APIs](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview) to support granularity selection on any chosen time dimension.

Reviewer: This is specific to Google sheets, too

- **Enhancement:** Improved querying error message when no semantic layer credentials were set.
- **Fix:** Removed errors preventing querying cumulative metrics with other granularities.
- **Fix:** Fixed various Tableau errors when querying certain metrics or when using calculated fields.
- **Fix:** Relaxed naming field expectations to better identify calculated fields.

> - **Fix:** Fixed an error when refreshing database metadata for columns that we can't convert to Arrow. These columns will now be skipped. This mainly affected Hex users while refreshing the entire database metadata.

Reviewer: This is just for Redshift, right? @aiguofer We might want to explain more on the outcome and table type

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think we could mention it only affects Redshift users with custom types

Author: oh ok, i took the content from here: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2005/skip-external-tables-in-get-schemas-to-handle-errors#comment-c8b4ffc5 which said it affected hex users. I'll update it then.

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer
- **New:** Introduced new granularity support for cumulative metrics in MetricFlow. Granularity options for cumulative metrics are slightly different than granularity for other metric types. For other metrics, we use the `date_trunc` function to implement granularity. However, because cumulative metrics are non-additive (values can't be added up), we can't use the `date_trunc` function to change their time grain granularity. 
  

>   Instead, we use the `first()`, `last()`, and `avg()` aggregation functions to aggregate cumulative metrics over the requested period. By default, we take the first value of the period. You can change this behavior by using the `period_agg` parameter. For more information, refer to [Granularity options for cumulative metrics](/docs/build/cumulative#granularity-options).

Author: ```suggestion
  Instead, we use the `first()`, `last()`, and `avg()` aggregation functions to aggregate cumulative metrics over the requested period. By default, we take the first value of the period. You can change this behavior by using the `period_agg` parameter. For more information, refer to [Granularity options for cumulative metrics](/docs/build/cumulative#period-agg).
```

Author: pending header change ok'ed by Jordan

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer

> - **New:** Introduced a new granularity option for cumulative metrics, `period_agg`, nested under the `type_params` parameter. It specifies how to roll up the cumulative metric to another granularity. Options are `start`, `end`, `average`. Defaults to `start` if no `window` is specified.

Reviewer 3: I would update this to focus on the new functionality i.e we now support granularity for cumulative metrics vs the configuration options i.e using `period_agg`. I think we should just link out to the full docs page for configuration options. 

- **New:** Introduced granularity support for cumulative metrics. Granularity options for cumulative metrics are slightly diffrent that granulairty for other metric types. Granularity for other metrics is implemented by using the `date_trunc` function, however cumulative values are not additive so we can't simply use the `date_trunc` function to aggregate cumulative metrics to a diffrent time grain.

Instead we the first(), last(), and avg() aggregation functions to aggregate cumulative metrics over the requested period. By default we take the first value of the period. You can change this behaviour using the `period_agg` parameter. See the docs for more details.

Author: ok got it, thank you!

- **New:** Added validation that derived metrics must always have an `expr` key.

> - **New:** Enabled cache to pickup where filters that are included in saved queries.

Author: hey @Jstein77 and @plypaul - wanted to double check if this entry was the same as the july 8th feature where you can add filters to your query and it'll hit the cache? if so, i'm not sure if we should add it to this release note? see: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2294/enable-cache-to-pickup-where-filters-that-are-included-in-saved#comment-a98da897

> - **Enhancement:** [Cumulative metrics](/docs/build/cumulative) now support the `cumulative_type_params` key. The `cumulative_type_params` parameter replaces `type_params`. MetricFlow supports the old `type_params` key but will issue a warning if used.

Reviewer 3: I think we can just strike this. It's not an enhancement in and of it's self, but an additional parameter needed to support cumulative granularity.

Author: ok got it @Jstein77 , do i need to add this to the docs though? we only have `type_params` in the doc: https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/cumulative

- **Enhancement:** Updated MetricFlow to use the new `cumulative_type_params` fields for cumulative metrics.
- **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), we added information icons and descriptions to metrics and dimensions options in the Query Builder menu. Click on the **Info icon** button to view a description of the metric or dimension. Available in the following Query Builder menu sections: metric, group by, where, saved selections, and saved queries.
- **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), you can now apply granularity to all time dimensions, not just metric time. This update uses our [APIs](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview) to support granularity selection on any chosen time dimension.
- **Enhancement:** Improved querying error message when no semantic layer credentials were set.
- **Fix:** Removed errors preventing querying cumulative metrics with other granularities.

> - **Fix:** Fixed various Tableau errors when querying certain metrics or when using calculated fields.

Author: asked here: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2381/refactor-slg-auth-logic-to-support-new-use-cases#comment-58157843

- **Fix:** Relaxed naming field expectations to better identify calculated fields.
- **Fix:** Fixed an error when refreshing database metadata for columns that we can't convert to Arrow. These columns will now be skipped. This mainly affected Hex users while refreshing the entire database metadata.
- **Fix:** Fixed Private Link connections for Databricks.

> 

Reviewer 3: One more to add! 
- **New**: Added support for predicate pushdown SQL optimization. We will now push down categorical dimensions filters to the metric source table. Previously filters we're applied after we selected from the metric source table. This can help reduce full table scans on certain query engines.

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer

> - **New:** Introduced new granularity support for cumulative metrics in MetricFlow. Granularity options for cumulative metrics are slightly different than granularity for other metric types. For other metrics, we use the date_trunc function to implement granularity. However, because cumulative metrics are non-additive (values can't be added up), we can't use the date_trunc function to change their time grain granularity. 

Author: ```suggestion
**New:** Introduced new granularity support for cumulative metrics in MetricFlow. Granularity options for cumulative metrics are slightly different than granularity for other metric types. For other metrics, we use the `date_trunc` function to implement granularity. However, because cumulative metrics are non-additive (values can't be added up), we can't use the `date_trunc` function to change their time grain granularity. 
```

## June 2024

#### dbt Semantic Layer
- **New:** Introduced new granularity support for cumulative metrics in MetricFlow. Granularity options for cumulative metrics are slightly different than granularity for other metric types. For other metrics, we use the date_trunc function to implement granularity. However, because cumulative metrics are non-additive (values can't be added up), we can't use the date_trunc function to change their time grain granularity. 
  
  Instead, we use the `first()`, `last()`, and `avg()` aggregation functions to aggregate cumulative metrics over the requested period. By default, we take the first value of the period. You can change this behavior by using the `period_agg` parameter. For more information, refer to [Granularity options for cumulative metrics](/docs/build/cumulative#granularity-options).
- **New:** Added support for <Term id="predicate-pushdown"/> SQL optimization in MetricFlow. We will now push down categorical dimensions filters to the metric source table. Previously filters we're applied after we selected from the metric source table. This change helps reduce full table scans on certain query engines.

> - **New:** Enabled cache to identify `where` filters included in saved queries.

Author: hey @Jstein77 and @plypaul - wanted to double check if this entry was the same as the july 8th feature where you can add filters to your query and it'll hit the cache? if so, i'm not sure if we should add it to this release note? see: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2294/enable-cache-to-pickup-where-filters-that-are-included-in-saved#comment-a98da897

Author: update, it is and craeted separate pr to ad callout.

> - **New:** Enabled cache to pickup where filters that are included in saved queries.

Author: ```suggestion
- **New:** Enabled cache to identify `where` filters included in saved queries.
```

- **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), we added information icons and descriptions to metrics and dimensions options in the Query Builder menu. Click on the **Info icon** button to view a description of the metric or dimension. Available in the following Query Builder menu sections: metric, group by, where, saved selections, and saved queries.
- **Enhancement:** In [Google Sheets](/docs/cloud-integrations/semantic-layer/gsheets), you can now apply granularity to all time dimensions, not just metric time. This update uses our [APIs](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview) to support granularity selection on any chosen time dimension.
- **Enhancement:** Improved querying error message when no semantic layer credentials were set.
- **Enhancement:** Querying grains for cumulative metrics now returns multiple granularity options (day, week, month, quarter, year) like all other metric types. Previously, you could only query one grain option for cumulative metrics.

> - **Enhancement:** Implemented caching logic in the Semantic Layer Gateway authentication management for the arrow/flight package.

Author: asked here: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2381/refactor-slg-auth-logic-to-support-new-use-cases#comment-58157843

Author: Lucas responded!

  
  Instead, we use the `first()`, `last()`, and `avg()` aggregation functions to aggregate cumulative metrics over the requested period. By default, we take the first value of the period. You can change this behavior by using the `period_agg` parameter. For more information, refer to [Granularity options for cumulative metrics](/docs/build/cumulative#granularity-options).
- **New:** Added support for <Term id="predicate-pushdown"/> SQL optimization in MetricFlow. We will now push down categorical dimensions filters to the metric source table. Previously filters we're applied after we selected from the metric source table. This change helps reduce full table scans on certain query engines.
- **New:** Enabled cache to pickup where filters that are included in saved queries.

> - **Enhancement:** Updated MetricFlow to use the new `cumulative_type_params` fields for cumulative metrics.

Author: removing per courtney's sugg here: https://linear.app/dbt-labs/issue/SL-2364/add-cumulative-type-params-to-yaml-spec
```suggestion
```
